Some more progress on the migration guide (#595)
embedded-graphics/embedded-graphics: MIGRATING-0.6-0.7.md

# Migrating from embedded-graphics 0.6.x to 0.7.0

> Please note that this migration guide may be incomplete in some sections. If any missing or incorrect information is found, please [open an issue](https://github.com/embedded-graphics/embedded-graphics/issues/new) or [join the Matrix chatroom](https://matrix.to/#/#rust-embedded-graphics:matrix.org) to bring it to our attention.

> ## Table of contents

Author: Similar to above comment, although we could reorder the sections below the ToC?

> ## Table of contents

Reviewer: Sorry my comment wasn't very cIear. I meant that the sections should be reorder and not only the ToC.

> ## Table of contents

Author: That makes more sense, thanks :). I've moved those sections to the bottom of the guide. This also puts `# General` as the first item which is a much better position for it.

- [Migrating from embedded-graphics 0.6.x to 0.7.0](#migrating-from-embedded-graphics-06x-to-070)

>   - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

Author: This is autogenerated by whatever VSCode plugin I'm using unfortunately. I could remove that and manually update the ToC but it would be nice (and reduce mistakes) to have it generated. Would you strongly prefer to remove these items?

>   - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

Reviewer: I would prefer it, but not enough to warrant any extra manual work. Just leave the items in the TOC, if there is no option in the plugin to remove them.

>   - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

Author: I found some options to remove the top level heading and the recursive item for the ToC so thankfully this is sorted now.

  - [For display driver authors](#for-display-driver-authors)
    - [Method changes](#method-changes)
  - [For crates that handle images](#for-crates-that-handle-images)
  - [For text rendering crates](#for-text-rendering-crates)
    - [Monospace fonts](#monospace-fonts)
    - [More complex fonts](#more-complex-fonts)
  - [General](#general)
    - [`Drawable`](#drawable)
    - [`IntoIterator` changes](#intoiterator-changes)
  - [Macros are removed](#macros-are-removed)
  - [Primitives](#primitives)
    - [Circle](#circle)
    - [Rectangle](#rectangle)
    - [Triangle](#triangle)
  - [Geometry](#geometry)
  - [Mock display](#mock-display)
  - [Style module](#style-module)
  - [Text and fonts](#text-and-fonts)

## For display driver authors

> Driver authors should use `DrawTarget` exported by the [`embedded-graphics-core`](https://crates.io/crates/embedded-graphics-core) crate to integrate with embedded-graphics.

Author: I've added a short section about `core`. I think it could use some improvement but it's a start. Eager to see your suggestions :)

# Migrating from embedded-graphics 0.6.x to 0.7.0

> > Please note that this migration guide may be incomplete in some sections. If any missing or incorrect information is found, please [open an issue](https://github.com/embedded-graphics/embedded-graphics/issues/new) or [join the Element chatroom](https://matrix.to/#/#rust-embedded-graphics:matrix.org) to bring it to our attention.

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
> Please note that this migration guide may be incomplete in some sections. If any missing or incorrect information is found, please [open an issue](https://github.com/embedded-graphics/embedded-graphics/issues/new) or [join the Matrix chatroom](https://matrix.to/#/#rust-embedded-graphics:matrix.org) to bring it to our attention.
```
But otherwise I like it.

`DrawTarget` now uses an associated type for the target color instead of a type parameter.

> `DrawTarget`s must also implement the `OriginDimensions` trait.

Reviewer: `DrawTarget`s aren't required to implement `OriginDimensions`. But it is recommended to implement `OriginDimensions` for most display drivers, because the drawable area starts in the origin.

Author: Good clarification, thanks. I added some text about the `Dimensions` trait bound and suggesting `OriginDimensions` instead. Let me know what you think - maybe it's superfluous and we should just mention `OriginDimensions`?

- `clear`

  Fills the entire display with a solid color.

These methods aim to be more compatible with hardware-accelerated drawing commands. Where possible, embedded-graphics primitives will use `fill_contiguous` and `fill_solid` to improve performance, however may fall back to `draw_iter` by default.

To reduce duplication, please search the `DrawTarget` documentation on <https://docs.rs/embedded-graphics-core> for more details on the usage and arguments of the above methods.

## For crates that handle images

> Crates that handle images should now implement the `ImageDrawable` and `OriginDimensions` traits to integrate with embedded-graphics.

Reviewer: Should we replace "should" with "must", because the two traits are required to be implemented to integrate with e-g?

The below examples shows an implementation for an imaginary `MyRgb888Image` which uses 24 bit color and draws to targets that support the same.

```rust
use embedded_graphics::{
    draw_target::{DrawTarget, DrawTargetExt},
    geometry::{OriginDimensions, Size},
    image::ImageDrawable,
    pixelcolor::{PixelColor, Rgb888},
    primitives::Rectangle,
};

struct MyRgb888Image {
  // ...
}

> impl ImageDrawable<Rgb888> for MyRgb888Image {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
impl ImageDrawable for MyRgb888Image {
```

    type Color = Rgb888;

    fn draw<D>(&self, target: &mut D) -> Result<(), D::Error>
    where
        D: DrawTarget<Color = Rgb888>,
    {
        // ... send contiguous pixels read from the image to the target ...
    }

    fn draw_sub_image<D>(&self, target: &mut D, area: &Rectangle) -> Result<(), D::Error>
    where
        D: DrawTarget<Color = Self::Color>,
    {
        // Delegate to the draw() method using a reduced draw target
        self.draw(&mut target.translated(-area.top_left).clipped(area))
    }
}

impl OriginDimensions for MyRgb888Image {
    fn size(&self) -> Size {
        // Return image width and height in pixels
    }
}
```

## For text rendering crates

> ### Monospace fonts

Reviewer: This section needs to be updated when #596 gets merged.

Author: I've updated the section. Let me know what you think.

-
-     fn char_offset(c: char) -> u32 {
-         char_offset_impl(c)
-     }
- }
+ use embedded_graphics::{
+     geometry::Size,
+     image::ImageRaw,
+     mono_font::{GlyphIndices, GlyphRange, MonoFont, MonoFontBuilder},
+ };
+
+ pub const EXAMPLE_FONT: MonoFont = MonoFontBuilder::new()
+     .image(ImageRaw::new_binary(
+         include_bytes!("../data/ExampleFont.raw"),
+         CHARS_PER_ROW * GLYPH_SIZE.width,
+     ))
+     .character_size(GLYPH_SIZE)
+     .glyph_indices(GlyphIndices::new(
+         &[
+             // Base ASCII range
+             GlyphRange::new(' ', '~', 0),
+             // Latin1 range with offset 96 character positions into the glyph bitmap
+             GlyphRange::new('\u{00A0}', 'ÿ', 96),
+         ],
+         // Fallback: show unrecognised characters as a '?'
+         '?' as u32 - ' ' as u32,
+     ))
+     .build();
```

### More complex fonts

Crates that handle text rendering more complex than simple monospace fonts should now implement the
`CharacterStyle` and `TextRenderer` traits. These are used for both text styling and layout.

Please refer to their respective docs for implementation details.

> An implementation of more complex font rendering using BDF font files is available in the [eg-bdf](https://github.com/embedded-graphics/bdf/tree/4eb67f99e5f3a1eba6aea4d57cb4642727a95f8f/eg-bdf) crate, which may be useful as a reference for other implementations.

Reviewer: Should we link to a specific revision in this case? eg-bdf will get more commits until e-g is released. I would suggest to simply link to the bdf repo. Once the README in the bdf repo is updated eg-bdf should be easy to find.

- `fill_contiguous`

  Fills a given area with an iterator providing a contiguous stream of pixel colors. This may be used to efficiently draw an image or other non-transparent item to the display. The given pixel iterator can be assumed to be contiguous, iterating from top to bottom, each row left to right. This assumption potentially allows more efficient streaming of pixel data to a display.

- `fill_solid`

  Fills a given area with a solid color.

- `clear`

  Fills the entire display with a solid color.

These methods aim to be more compatible with hardware-accelerated drawing commands. Where possible, embedded-graphics drawables will use `fill_contiguous` and `fill_solid` to improve performance, however may fall back to `draw_iter` by default.

To reduce duplication, please search the `DrawTarget` documentation on <https://docs.rs/embedded-graphics-core> for more details on the usage and arguments of the above methods.

> ## For crates that handle images

Author: I've clearly struggled with this too. Any of these?

- Image format support crates
- Image decoding crates
- Image crates

I'm not keen on any of them but it might inspire something better from your side.

> ## For crates that handle images

Reviewer: Out of these three I think I would use "Image format support creates". It's long, but is the most accurate description. Should we just go with that for now and change it later if we find a better description?

> ## For crates that handle images

Author: There's a golden phrase out there for sure, but yeah for now I've gone with the verbose option.

Crates that handle images must now implement the `ImageDrawable` and `OriginDimensions` traits from [`embedded-graphics-core`](#the-embedded-graphics-core-crate) to integrate with embedded-graphics.

> The below examples shows an implementation for an imaginary `MyRgb888Image` which uses 24 bit color and draws to targets that support the same.

Reviewer: The second part of the sentence could be interpreted as a limitation of the example, but it's an inherent property of the image API that the color types must be the same.

```suggestion
The below examples shows an implementation for an imaginary `MyRgb888Image` which uses 24 bit RGB color.
```

```rust
use embedded_graphics::{
    draw_target::{DrawTarget, DrawTargetExt},
    geometry::{OriginDimensions, Size},
    image::ImageDrawable,
    pixelcolor::{PixelColor, Rgb888},
    primitives::Rectangle,
};

struct MyRgb888Image {
  // ...
}

impl ImageDrawable for MyRgb888Image {
    type Color = Rgb888;

    fn draw<D>(&self, target: &mut D) -> Result<(), D::Error>
    where
        D: DrawTarget<Color = Rgb888>,
    {
        // Draw the image to the target, e.g. by calling `target.fill_contiguous` or by using another `Drawable`.
    }

    fn draw_sub_image<D>(&self, target: &mut D, area: &Rectangle) -> Result<(), D::Error>
    where
        D: DrawTarget<Color = Self::Color>,
    {
        // Delegate to the draw() method using a reduced draw target
        self.draw(&mut target.translated(-area.top_left).clipped(area))
    }
}

impl OriginDimensions for MyRgb888Image {
    fn size(&self) -> Size {
        // Return image width and height in pixels
    }
}
```

## For text rendering crates

### Monospace fonts

> Monospaced fonts should now be built by creatign a `MonoFont` struct and assigning it to a `const`. The following example shows a migration of a font with 5x9 pixel characters using the Latin-1 encoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monospaced fonts are no longer using a separate type per font and are now defined by using a `MonoFont` object. In most applications fonts will be declared as a compile time constant, but fonts can now also be loaded or generated at runtime.

The following example shows a migration of a font with 5x9 pixel characters using the ISO-8859-1 (Latin-1) encoding.
```

```diff
// The font bitmap has 32 character glyphs per row.
const CHARS_PER_ROW: u32 = 32;

// Each character is 5x9 px.
const GLYPH_SIZE: Size = Size::new(5, 9);

> - // Map a given character to an index in the glyph bitmap
> - fn char_offset_impl(c: char) -> u32 {
> -     let fallback = '?' as u32 - ' ' as u32;
> -     if c < ' ' {
> -         return fallback;
> -     }
> -     if c <= '~' {
> -         return c as u32 - ' ' as u32;
> -     }
> -     if c < '\u{00A0}' || c > 'ÿ' {
> -         return fallback;
> -     }
> -     c as u32 - ' ' as u32 - 33
> - }
> -
> - #[derive(Debug, Copy, Clone)]
> - pub struct ExampleFont {}
> - impl Font for ExampleFont {
> -     const FONT_IMAGE: &'static [u8] = include_bytes!("../data/ExampleFont.raw");
> -     const CHARACTER_SIZE: Size = Size::new(5, 9);
> -     const FONT_IMAGE_WIDTH: u32 = Self::CHARACTER_SIZE.width * CHARS_PER_ROW;
> -
> -     fn char_offset(c: char) -> u32 {
> -         char_offset_impl(c)
> -     }
> - }
> + use embedded_graphics::{
> +     geometry::Size,
> +     image::ImageRaw,
> +     mono_font::{mapping::StrGlyphMapping, DecorationDimensions, MonoFont},
> + };
> +
> + pub const EXAMPLE_FONT: MonoFont = MonoFont {
> +     image: ImageRaw::new_binary(
> +         // In this example, this equals 32 characters per row, each character 5px across.
> +         160,
> +     ),
> +     // A glyph mapping with base ASCII range and Latin1 range.
> +     glyph_mapping: &StrGlyphMapping::new("\0 ~\0\u{00A0}ÿ", '?' as usize - ' ' as usize),
> +     character_size: Size::new(5, 9),
> +     character_spacing: 0,
> +     baseline: 7,
> +     underline: DecorationDimensions::new(8, 1),
> +     strikethrough: DecorationDimensions::new(4, 1),
> + };

Reviewer: I would suggest to tweak the example a bit, so that we can use a predefined mapping:

```suggestion
- // Map a given character to an index in the glyph bitmap
- fn char_offset_impl(c: char) -> u32 {
-     let fallback = '?' as u32 - ' ' as u32;
-     if c < ' ' {
-         return fallback;
-     }
-     if c <= '\u{007f}' {
-         return c as u32 - ' ' as u32;
-     }
-     if c < '\u{00A0}' || c > 'ÿ' {
-         return fallback;
-     }
-     c as u32 - ' ' as u32 - 32
- }
-
- #[derive(Debug, Copy, Clone)]
- pub struct ExampleFont {}
- impl Font for ExampleFont {
-     const FONT_IMAGE: &'static [u8] = include_bytes!("../data/ExampleFont.raw");
-     const CHARACTER_SIZE: Size = Size::new(5, 9);
-     const FONT_IMAGE_WIDTH: u32 = Self::CHARACTER_SIZE.width * CHARS_PER_ROW;
-
-     fn char_offset(c: char) -> u32 {
-         char_offset_impl(c)
-     }
- }
+ use embedded_graphics::{
+     geometry::Size,
+     image::ImageRaw,
+     mono_font::{mapping::ISO_8859_1, DecorationDimensions, MonoFont},
+ };
+
+ pub const EXAMPLE_FONT: MonoFont = MonoFont {
+     image: ImageRaw::new_binary(
+         // This example uses 32 characters per row, each character 5px across.
+         32 * 5,
+     ),
+     glyph_mapping: &ISO_8859_1,
+     character_size: Size::new(5, 9),
+     character_spacing: 0,
+     baseline: 7,
+     underline: DecorationDimensions::new(8, 1),
+     strikethrough: DecorationDimensions::new(4, 1),
+ };
```

```

> If a more complex or dynamic glyph mapping is required, a function can be provided instead:
> 
> ```rust
> use embedded_graphics::{
>     geometry::Size,
>     image::ImageRaw,
>     mono_font::{mapping::StrGlyphMapping, DecorationDimensions, MonoFont},
> };
> 
> pub const EXAMPLE_FONT: MonoFont = MonoFont {
>     image: ImageRaw::new_binary(
>         include_bytes!("../data/ExampleFont.raw"),
>         // In this example, this equals 32 characters per row, each character 5px across.
>         160,
>     ),
>     glyph_mapping: &char_offset,
>     character_size: Size::new(5, 9),
>     character_spacing: 0,
>     baseline: 7,
>     underline: DecorationDimensions::new(8, 1),
>     strikethrough: DecorationDimensions::new(4, 1),
> };
> 
> fn char_offset(c: char) -> usize {
>     let fallback = '?' as usize - ' ' as usize;
>     if c < ' ' {
>         return fallback;
>     }
>     if c <= '~' {
>         return c as usize - ' ' as usize;
>     }
>     if c < '\u{00A0}' || c > 'ÿ' {
>         return fallback;
>     }
>     c as usize - ' ' as usize - 33
> }
> ```

Reviewer: Now that the example above doesn't use `StrGlyphMapping` anymore I would suggest to use a single example to demonstrate a string mapping and using a function. I've also changed the mapping to one that isn't included as a predefined mapping.

```suggestion
Custom mappings between characters and glyph positions can be used by using `StrGlyphMapping`, using a function or implementing the `GlyphMapping` trait:

```rust
use embedded_graphics::{
    geometry::Size,
    image::ImageRaw,
    mono_font::{mapping::StrGlyphMapping, DecorationDimensions, MonoFont},
};

pub const EXAMPLE_FONT: MonoFont = MonoFont {
    image: ImageRaw::new_binary(
        include_bytes!("../data/digits.raw"),
        // In this example, this equals 32 characters per row, each character 15px across.
        10 * 15,
    ),
    glyph_mapping: &StrGlyphMapping::new("\009", 0),
    // or use a function:
    // glyph_mapping: &digit_mapping,
    character_size: Size::new(15, 30),
    character_spacing: 5,
    baseline: 29,
    underline: DecorationDimensions::default_underline(30),
    strikethrough: DecorationDimensions::default_strikethrough(30),
};

fn digit_mapping(c: char) -> usize {
    if c >= '0' || c <= '9' {
        c as usize - '0' as usize
    } else {
        0
    }
}
```

The `width` and `height` methods have been removed. Use the `bounding_box` method provided by the `Dimensions` trait instead:

```rust
// Or: use embedded_graphics::prelude::*;
use embedded_graphics::geometry::Dimensions;

use embedded_graphics::mock_display::MockDisplay;

let display = MockDisplay::new();

let width = display.bounding_box().size.width;
let height = display.bounding_box().size.height;
```

The `PartialEq` implementation for `MockDisplay` is now removed. To check for equality against another `MockDisplay`, the `assert_eq`, `assert_eq_with_message` or `eq` methods can be used instead.

```rust
#[test]
fn check_equality() {
    let expected = MockDisplay::from_pattern(&[ /* ... */ ]);

    let mut display = MockDisplay::new();

    Circle::new(Point::new(1, 1), 1)
        .into_styled(PrimitiveStyle::with_fill(BinaryColor::On))
        .draw(&mut display)?;

    display.assert_eq(&expected);
}
```

The `assert_pattern` and `assert_pattern_with_message` methods are also useful for checking display state in tests.

> ```rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```diff
```

- #[test]
- fn tiny_circle_filled() {
-     let mut display = MockDisplay::new();
-
-     Circle::new(Point::new(1, 1), 1)
-         .into_styled(PrimitiveStyle::with_fill(BinaryColor::On))
-         .draw(&mut display)?;
-
-     assert_eq!(
-         display,
-         MockDisplay::from_pattern(&[
-             " # ",
-             "###",
-             " # "
-         ])
-     );
- }
+ #[test]
+ fn tiny_circle_filled() {
+     let mut display = MockDisplay::new();
+
+     Circle::new(Point::new(0, 0), 3)
+         .into_styled(PrimitiveStyle::with_fill(BinaryColor::On))
+         .draw(&mut display)
+         .unwrap();
+
+     display.assert_pattern(&[
+         " # ",
+         "###",
+         " # ",
+     ]);
+ }
```

> To see a visual representation of failing equality tests, set `EG_FANCY_PANIC=1` when running the tests.

Reviewer: See comment above.

```suggestion
```

## Primitives

> Previously, drawing a filled shape with a transparent stroke of non-zero width would bleed the fill under the stroke. This is changed in 0.7 to honor the stroke color, even if it is `None`, allowing for filled shapes with transparent borders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, drawing a filled shape with a transparent stroke of non-zero width would bleed the fill under the stroke. This is changed in 0.7 to honor the stroke width and alignment, even if it is the stroke color is `None`, allowing for filled shapes with transparent borders.
```

> A stroke or fill color of `None` now does not affect the primitive's dimensions.

Reviewer: IMO we should emphasize that the "dimensions" are the return value of `Dimensions::bounding_box`:
```suggestion
The color of stroke and fill no longer affects the primitive's bounding, that is returned by `Dimensions::bounding_box`. The stroke width is now always considered even if the stroke is transparent.
```

Author: Thank you! I was struggling to find good wording for this behaviour.

To style fonts, use the `MonoTextStyle` struct. `TextStyle` still exists, but has been repurposed to provide a more general interface to text styling. This more closely mirrors the way primitives are built and styled.

> The default vertical alignment for fonts is now the font's baseline. To retain the 0.6 behaviour and position text using its top-left corner, set the `baseline` property to `Baseline::Top`:

Reviewer: We should use "baseline" instead of "vertical alignment" to be consistent with the other docs.

Author: "The default baseline for fonts is now the font's baseline" is strange to read here though. I'd be ok keeping it as "vertical alignment" as that describes the behaviour as opposed to the property. Can you think of a better way of bringing this across?

Author: Just bumping this in case you missed it :)
